Welcome to Data Leakage and Other Pitfalls.
After watching this video, you will be
able to define data leakage and explain how to
mitigate it.
You will also be able to describe feature
importance interpretation and other modeling pitfalls
Imagine you want to train a model to predict house prices.
Along with historical data like square footage,
you engineer a feature using the average of
the actual home prices over the entire dataset.
You are pleased to see how well your model
performs on the test data.
However, your model was taught using data
that was leaked from the future and that it
can't access in production.
Without this access, deploying your model
won't perform as well as you thought it
would given the test results.
Data leakage occurs when your model's
training data includes information that would not be
available in the real world,
such as unseen data after deployment.
Data leakage deceives your model,
leading it to perform misleadingly well during training
and validation.
Since your test dataset will also contain
this leaked data, evaluation won't detect
the poor generalizability until you implement
your model into production.
Data snooping happens when the training set
contains information about the testing set
or the model sees data it shouldn't have access to.
This can occur when you include future
information when predicting outcomes, such as tomorrow's
stock price, to predict today's.
It can also take place while engineering
new features using the entire dataset.
Data processing pipelines should be run
independently on the training and testing data.
To mitigate the data leakage risk, you
must carefully select training and testing data.
If any future data leaks into the training data,
you have a problem.
Let's look at what mitigation measures you can take.
Avoid features like global averages or other
statistics derived from the entire dataset.
Ensure proper separation between your training,
validation, and test sets, avoiding overlap
or contamination.
Ensure that none of your features contain
unavailable information when making real-world
predictions with your deployed model.
Pay attention to how you implement cross-validation
to ensure you aren't leaking data across
different validation folds.
This is particularly important when using
time-dependent data.
In this case, you should use a time-series
split rather than the usual train-test split.
To avoid leakage when using cross-validation
to tune your model's hyperparameters, fit
your pipeline separately to each training fold
and apply the resultant fitted pipeline
to its corresponding validation fold.
Assuming you have imported the required libraries,
loaded your data, and taken precautions to
ensure you don't already have any data leakage,
consider this Python code for training a classifier.
First, you split your data into training and test data sets.
For this example, assume this is a valid
method for your dataset and no temporal or other
leakage contamination will occur.
Then, define a pipeline of three models,
a scalar, PCA, and a KNN classifier.
Next, a parameter grid consisting of a set of
values is set up to try for a number of
PCA components and the number of neighbors in KNN.
Now, optimize your model by performing a
grid search using cross-validation.
It is important to notice here that the
pipeline is input to the grid search.
This ensures that the pipeline is applied
separately to each training fold and its corresponding
validation set.
After finding the best parameters,
you evaluate your final model on the first set you held
back to get an unbiased estimate of your
model's performance in the wild.
If your data is temporal, where the order of
your data points in time is crucial, you
want to avoid randomly splitting it into training and test sets.
Instead, you need to split your data into
sequential training and testing sets, ensuring
that the training set always precedes the test set.
Modifying your code to implement time-series
cross-validation is easy.
Instead of using train-test-split, you
would use time-series-split and specify that you
want to use this cross-validation method
during hyperparameter tuning by setting CV
equals TSCV in grid-search-cv.
In this example, Scikit-learn's time-series-split
splits your data into four equal-sized folds,
retaining their temporal order.
Each split uses a portion of the data from
the past for training and the remaining future
data for validation.
The training set expands to include more
data with each split while the test set shrinks.
Identifying some common pitfalls and assessing
feature importances provided by a trained
machine learning model is essential.
Highly correlated or redundant features used
in modeling result in shared importances,
which lowers their apparent influence.
Further, blindly selecting what seems to be
the most important features to use in subsequent
modeling can cause a significant feature to be
selected to degrade your results.
Some algorithms, like linear regression,
don't naturally account for the scale of features
so that unskilled data can distort importance rankings.
Feature importance indicates correlation, not causation.
Important features don't necessarily drive outcomes.
Some models rank individual feature importance
without accounting for interactions, potentially
underestimating or overestimating their combined impact.
For example, suppose you have two features
that don't provide enough information for
linear regression to perform well.
Still, their interaction or product boosts the
linear regression performance.
Then, a nonlinear algorithm like random forest
regression could implicitly detect this interaction,
leading to good performance.
For linear regression, the separate features
would erroneously seem unimportant.
At the same time, their importance would be
shared for random forest, and you would have
no idea that their product is the crucial explanatory variable.
Here are some common modeling pitfalls to consider.
Using raw data without appropriate feature
selection or transformation prevents you from
discovering your optimal model.
Choosing the wrong evaluation metric or
misinterpreting metrics can mislead your evaluation.
Failing to address class imbalances and
classification problems biases your predictions towards
the majority classes.
Automated machine learning tools can be powerful,
but you still need to understand your data
and the model the system creates for you.
It is crucial to understand that if your
model lacks features that have a causal impact on
the target variable, then the what-if scenarios
generated by the model may be invalid.
Without causal relationships, your model's
predictions based on hypothetical changes
can be highly misleading or inaccurate.
In this video, you learned that data leakage
occurs when your model's training data includes
information that would not be available in the
real world or unseen data after deployment.
You can mitigate data leakage by avoiding
overlap or contamination between training,
validation, and test sets, ensuring training
features are available for real-world deployment,
using cross-validation carefully, and hyperparameter tuning.
Some common pitfalls in assessing feature
importances provided by a trained machine
learning model are feature redundancy, scale sensitivity,
assuming causation, and overlooking
feature interactions.
Other modeling pitfalls include selecting
inappropriate features, misinterpreting evaluation
metrics, ignoring class imbalance, blind reliance
on automation, and performing what-if scenarios
based on non-causal data.